the Sun one of the greatest wonders of
the world we rely on it as a friendly
neighbor to light our world and thus we
sometimes forget what a raging nuclear
fusion based inferno
it actually is in late September 2013
part of a two hundred thousand kilometer
long filament that recently ripped
through the Sun's corona burning and
heat up to 1 million eight hundred
thousand degrees Fahrenheit leaving
behind what looks like a glowing Canyon
the Sun provides us the energy that is
essential to life on earth in fact the
Sun provides us ten thousand times more
energy than we use but solar flares and
coronal mass ejections are also a
constant threat the Carrington event of
1859 set telegraph offices on fire and
brought the Northern Lights aglow down
to Cuba and Hawaii if repeated today
this might wipe out the world's
electrical grid cause aircraft to fail
and wipe out our satellites
all the Kessler syndrome and heat back
in the sixties and seventies said if we
don't take care and stop using explosive
boats and leaving fuel and rockets like
explode over time this debris is going
to build up and at a certain point it
will reach where it will just cascade
and create more and more debris and
basically go out of control or deny us
access to space swarms of debris in
low-earth and polar orbits now threaten
weather and communications satellite
constellations as well as the
International Space Station the Hubble
telescope and even the new James Webb
telescope that promises to let us see
back to the beginning of time collie
Kessler syndrome is really nothing more
than the way nature operates with orbits
that cross one another and they'll
eventually collide with one another
they'll create smaller debris and a
certain amount of larger debris and then
that larger debris can go on and cascade
to create even more debris and you can
get a runaway cascading effect when
that's applied to low-earth orbit that
phenomena is taking place right now but
at a very slow rate at about once every
10 years we're seeing a collision
between large objects and then but that
rate will increase even if we don't add
any new objects to Earth orbit
asteroid impacts are tremendous events
and once you have a good solid orbit on
them you can predict a hundred years
ahead of time whether there is a
likelihood of an impact here there are
an estimated 500,000 to a million
asteroids that are 30 meters or larger
in size at 30 meters these are potential
city killers we now know that a five
kilometer wide asteroid crashing to
earth 65 million years ago and the
residue rose up and blotted out the Sun
and it killed off the dinosaurs and
two-thirds of all species in the world's
worst mass extinction event the proof is
still with us in the crater that we
could still see today on the coast of
Mexico a bus-sized asteroid swept by
Earth on May 2nd 2014 it was detected
only three days earlier it had the
kinetic energy of a nuclear bomb
if they hit earth bad things can happen
and so for an example the asteroid that
hit in Tunguska in 1908 was about 40
meters across okay and that caused an
area of devastation roughly the size of
the San Francisco Bay Area
this million isso objects close orbits
cross Earth's orbit and we currently
know of about 10,000 of them our project
called Sentinel is to launch a telescope
a Space Telescope to catalog and track
and make this map of all the asteroids
in the inner part of the solar system
today new research is trying to develop
innovative technology that can allow us
to remove the largest debris elements
this same technology may allow us to
start on orbit servicing to make very
expensive satellites live longer looking
at the Earth from space you realize what
a precious places is you realize that we
have a responsibility to continue safe
operations on board spaceship earth and
that means protecting humanity